the only reason I'm going to bring some
shoes is because we've got the first
part of this we've got to go through
some semi rough country we're going to
take you up to the original 50 and $500
house first and then we'll see the
spectacular one so this is all your land
up in here yeah it's a quarter of a mile
by a quarter of a mile so you came out
here looking for a place to build you
know to buy yep you want to build your
own place yep
and did you know you're gonna go
underground um no I didn't at first this
is kind of a wild bear area this land
this county here is two-thirds National
Forest well my house my original house
is right up there about 50 yards now
this this little one that your
daughter's buy that house cost $15 to
build when I was in grammar school I was
drawing plans for homesteads the reason
I went underground was I was freezing in
this little shack and it wasn't worth
insulating I tried to figure what could
I build that would be quick easy cheap
and warm above all I guess that's a
mushroom I thought maybe it was their
scat
bear scat is black like that and we've
had our share of bears up here yeah
reminds the Bears of it too
unfortunately this is a 500 dollar house
we dug this by hand and built the whole
thing in in three months here in the
northwest we don't have any Sun in the
wintertime you know but I could still
get just enough light to write by and to
read by
oh yeah sure I lived in this for over 30
years your eyes will get adjusted here
pretty quick you still get a lot of
light oh yeah that's that's the uphill
patio and now remember the the Sun is
going to go down pretty soon so we're
not getting as much light as we could in
here this cost only $500 but how much
time I mean a lot of digging or yeah we
dug dug everything by hand and now the
lumber that we used in the original
house was all from thrown-away lumber
from the mills that's how I could build
a place for $50 you know this over here
is kind of an invention of mine I call
this the barbecue windows the barbecue
windows you can stand inside in hot
weather and you're cool because you're
in here you can stand in here in cold
weather and stay warm because you're in
here and you can cook outside and the
smoke goes up that's the fire area right
here yeah yeah sure
we you know I had a great over it and
but you don't worry about burning down
your house
no no underground houses do not do not
burn very well so that's that's a nice
thing and this has always been my bed
area here and there I called the use of
fire windows because I used to have
campfires out there at night you see
that polyethylene that's where the last
bear who got in came in through one
night I heard a bear out there I guess I
want to open that window and something
was stopping it from opening the bear
had been out there that closed only this
section in here was in the original
50/50 dollar house I turned it into my
palatial 500 dollar house you tell me a
little bit more about why you went
underground well because I was freezing
above ground and the reason I write
about it and prophesize on it is because
there are great advantages of going
underground it's warm in the winter it's
cool in the summer you use half the
building materials you
by yourself with hand tools there's less
taxes the guy comes around to assess
your house you say what for this hole in
the ground
you know it's aesthetically pleasing can
be built by anyone you can camouflage it
so it can't be found it's defensible it
takes up none of the Earth's growing
surface there's just any number of
advantages to going underground why
haven't we done it then why haven't we
done it more on a mass scale that is a
wonderful question and that's that's
where I come in they haven't done it
because they haven't figured out how to
get windows into the places in in
abundance and we figured that out I've
always seen basement windows all my life
I was originally going to put a basement
window on the uphill side and then I
thought well if I'm going to put a
basement window in there why not bring
it down also you know start stacking
windows down on it and then I thought if
I'm going to stack windows like that on
the uphill side why not go out a little
also and plant a garden out there so
that's that's how the uphill patio came
about I mean for example all of these
windows here on the uphill side our
windows that the normal builders and
architects have never conceived of they
built the first thought house they in a
hillside like this they build a house
like this with all the windows on the
south side and they have very few if any
windows at all on the rest of the house
around the rest of the house so it has
no balance of light and you knew you
need a balance of light in a house you
need windows from these two sides in
every room that matters that one that
you're shooting now is totally
underground and unfortunately it's soon
to go into the ground because it's a for
35 years now I've never done anything
with it and any house that you leave go
for 35 years goes pretty fast I was
building this for other people when I
started writing heavy again so I let it
go but there was an ambitious little
house in a pinch it would have slipped
17 people in here and I can't guarantee
a second to collapse on us
the first plans had this idea of going
underground on a hillside and having a
big bunch of South windows on it that is
what I call the first slot house and
it's a disaster
that's what everybody builds when they
build underground houses these days and
they shouldn't be one of the advances
that I made is when I build an
underground house on a hill like this I
cut out the upper part make what I call
an uphill patio and that gives us lots
of light from the upper side in the
course if you plant that it's beautiful
it's wonderful but what I want to show
you as a shelter house that we we don't
have completed but if times get really
rough I'm sure I'll have plenty of
volunteers up here to complete it yeah
it's the shelter s nuclear attack forest
fire earth changes riots whatever what
have you since its underground if we if
we don't have a stove in here but we've
got a lot of people in here the body
temperature will will keep this livable
yeah it is it this roof ilysm at the
level of the ground good idea that this
is something can be replicable anywhere
in the country sure and if you build it
yourself it can be very inexpensive
these guys he can pull off the land your
posts and beams and girders and so the
lumber might be maybe $300 we dug all
this by hand by the way this and the
other house in there so we can you
juggle by hand shovels yeah I don't know
how long it took us to dig wait I don't
like digging much more than three hours
a day but I do like digging up to three
hours a day
marvelous exercise you can see your
progress you know as you're going good
with mattock work it digging is fun
within reason
well we can start moving down we got a
lot more to see Hey for two years before
I moved up here I was a labor labor
foreman wherever the machines couldn't
dig we
I saw that houses could actually be
built you know how do you rotate with
your bills how do you find a good spot
by instinct by sleeping out on the site
for a while when I was building for
other people I would go up and I would
sleep out on the site for a couple of
nights get the feel of the place so you
don't look for a certain type of dirt or
a solidity to the dirt or something for
building I would and in fact we're in
about the prime building underground
building area I've ever found
it's silt and sand and a bit of clay the
walls stand up when you when you dig
either by hand or with a machine they
stand up and hold their shape and
there's no rock here which is really
nice when you're hand digging you just
love to be a bare foot now all my life
really yep so for you back to the land
is quite literal yeah yeah yeah
would you consider yourself part of the
back to land movement oh absolutely I
was in the first wave of the hippie
back-to-the-landers in 68 probably
10,000 hippies left the San Francisco
area in the month of May I was one of
that 10,000 we were biting off more than
we could chew but what we could chew was
wonderful
this looks like a traditional house this
is from this side ah you want from the
other sides what an underground house is
not an underground house is nowhere in
common with the basement then a
penthouse apartment has in common with a
hot dark dusty attic you walk into this
house from ground level and you take a
few steps in and you're suddenly 12 feet
underground beneath the surface rather
we're 12 feet beneath the surface here
we're 6 feet beneath the surface over
there we would be somewhere between 12
and 6 feet beneath the surface on the
south side and on the north side but
we've excavated for four windows and for
air and light and so forth you know at
this point the earth was a little more
than six feet deep here six feet deep at
the end of that so is probably 8 or 10
feet deep here yes it doesn't feel
underground no it's not technically
underground it's a this is an earth
integrated house we're working with the
earth you know take it out if you want
windows and doors this is one of our
least completed rooms this is a bunk
room and the upper bunks got good window
the lower bunk we're going to get a
two-foot-wide culvert and we're going to
dig out a trench in the solid earth here
and then back fell over it so the kid
lying in bed there can still see Canada
even though he's a solid earth between
him and Canada this would be the
bathroom we got some of the plumbing in
but we don't have any water supply up
here yet so we're not in any hurry to
finish the bathroom this is called the
cooks room it's the best bedroom in the
house they get the best bed best
mattress so you're insulating oh yeah
we're above ground at this at this point
but we're not insulating on these walls
because it's Ella ders behind there this
could be done in any limit sure matter
each the temperatures of the climate up
to any extreme degrees so if you live in
a really hot climate or a really cool
climate its work even better in really
Hut and really cold climates and eight
foot down the earth stays at the yearly
mean temperature where that climate here
it stays about 52 degrees an earth
integrated house we're working with the
earth we're not overwhelmed by the earth
we don't overwhelm the earth we're
working with her with the mother the
heat from your house in the wintertime
it's not escaping out into the
atmosphere it's heating the outside of
your house they and it still keeps
eating in the outside of your house it
retains that heat and the same thing on
the cooling it's cooling your house in
the summertime we're on a ridge at this
point the ridge is fairly levels we cut
through the ridge so we got lots of
light from the south and lots of views
from the north and good light from the
north too
normally I wouldn't I wouldn't use this
this is a little atrium type thing here
but I needed windows in there and needed
windows here and I needed windows there
so I built a little atrium one of the
designs underground designs that I've
developed here is you see how this part
of the roof slants back before it comes
down like this normally the roof is
slanting like this but up here it's got
an additional slant like this so that
raises it above the normal pitch of the
roof and that allows us to put windows
in there and then all along that side
and I call that a Sun scoop and as far
as I know it's the first one ever built
we want a house that's got windows on
all four sides even though it's earth
integrated
and my all my other houses even if
they're totally underground they still
have windows on all four sides not
everywhere in all four sides but they
have windows on all four sides so we
have light coming into a room from two
directions in every room and that's
really really really important it's
funny because inside it doesn't feel
like it's underground but outside it
actually looks underground 50 percent
underground yeah it looks like it just
has to so is it just because you've
chosen the opening so carefully well
yeah sure sure there's there's one room
here that's totally underground that's
on the other on the other side of those
other side of those windows we call that
the cool room
it's kind of like a mini root cellar we
got three-foot earth on that roof that
would do us in case of atomic attack
that's the cool room yep yeah it's like
it's like a root cellar in inside the
house
we've actually got a deep freeze that
can go in there it runs off at 12 volts
so really feels by conventional this
feels a conventional living room to an
extent it doesn't feel you know
underground is it feel no but at the
buoy are underground you know this is
all earth on the roof fact we are super
Earth integrated the walls are filled
with earth in this house and that does a
number of things it cuts the radiation
if we're come to that to make the place
fire resistant it helps insulate between
the rooms it's dirt cheap so you're also
probably saving on some insulation and
oh sure oh sure my type of construction
it does give support you have a beam
here and a beam here and if you got
earth behind it and you put a girder or
something across there then the pressure
from this side is counterbalanced by the
pressure from that side you know so it
becomes a very stable structure so you
feel that anybody could do this
it just is it like post-and-beam or is
it a different idea no it's called PSP
post sure and polyethylene system a post
second to the ground we've treated or
protecting it the wood from the earth
nowadays I'm protecting them by charring
them first of all which will double the
lifespan of a post on the ground that's
a post shoring as lumber out here you're
going to have to have at least 2 inch
lumber and most hillsides and your post
should probably be not more than 6 feet
apart and then you put a layer of
polyethylene wrap the the lumber with a
layer of polyethylene and you've got an
extremely low-cost house extremely fire
resistant radiation resistant wind
resistant and it's going to heat you in
the winter time and it's going to cool
you in the summertime ok this is my own
apartment here that's the kitchen area
that's the dining table there and this
is my work table where I'll be doing
when we're writing ok though we're on
the on the second floor at this level
here we're approximately lower close to
3 foot below surface at this level here
in this part of the house over here
we're totally below the surface although
it's a that's only it's only another 3
feet or so itself there something like
this might be working visiting 2 people
because it does look more conventional
that they should integrate with the
earth yeah I'm hoping so this is only
1,800 square feet we're bringing it in
for probably one-tenth the cost of
construction down in California or
someplace like that you know all these
structural members were off the land so
it didn't cost me anything other than
building it of the structural members in
the cross supports here maybe they were
off land the these two windows were
salvaged and so they were only a couple
of bucks each the challenges to come up
with a integrated plan where you can put
used used windows into a into a room and
have a pattern that's pleasing to the
eye I buy a lot of used windows
and I number each window and I measure
each window and I'll cut out little
scale window models and I'll sit down
and I'll you know you know I'll play
with these things for a couple of nights
and I come up with you know I like I
like that I like those guys over there
in particular my favorite this was this
was kind of a tough one to come up with
but I like it too the only window that I
had to pay any real money for was that
little gap there that angle guy I
probably got these two big windows here
for probably the two of them for 10
bucks I thought I was going to be able
to pull this in for $15,000 as it turns
out it's going to be probably 40,000
because can't do the labor myself
anymore you based your ideas at all in
untraditional designs I know there's a
lot of traditional cultures that have
gone underground
Native Americans six example yeah Native
Americans went underground from the
Dakotas they had great big underground
places with Don Wilson went whole to
eliminate the smoke and let in light
down to the southwest where they went
three foot underground and then then
arch natural vegetation over it
you'll find various cultures who have
gone underground
I am totally absolutely irrevocably
convinced that we are living in
Industrial Age we are the ones who are
living in poverty not the indigenous
people of this world this was a $50 an
up underground house book and it's been
pretty much supporting me since 78 when
I brought it out this is the house we
were in earlier today that's that's the
five hundred dollar house here's the
first thought design you get Windows
from only one side generally in a house
like this which is terrible light you
get all your drainage going back into
the hillside and all your drainage
coming down into the hillside and it's
going to back up against this back wall
I don't care what you do sooner or later
that back wall is going to leak you have
no cross ventilation in there you have
no egress out the back it's a terrible
thought house instead we turn it around
like this we put in uphill patio there
and all the moisture is coming down the
hill absorbs into the ground before it
reaches the house and if it is on a
north slope you get a tremendous amount
of light in there if it's on a south
slope then you're going to put in Gables
going to put in Royer fires you're going
to put in Hollywood wings you're going
to put in Sun scoops so there's no
reason whatsoever to build an
underground house that doesn't have all
the windows you could possibly want in
there this is the house we built for a
client everything it was that was
exposed to the atmosphere was windows or
doors this was a 5,000 square-foot
underground house with a greenhouse
built in the early 1980s for $20,000
here was an underground house built in
Holland the authorities came out and
said hunts we understand you have been
building illegally here and Hunt said
take a look around man you know it's um
I'm busy you'll have to look around
yourself and they walked around this
house and didn't see it the advantages
of building an underground house
especially with our method there's less
tax to pay on it it's warm in the winter
it's cool in the summer
it's a fallout shelter it cuts
atmospheric radiation it's defensible
its concealable it's relatively
fireproof no foundation is needed less
other building material your pipes
should never freeze they're weatherproof
I can't believe people build houses in
tornado and hurricane country if they
went underground they're prettier down
weather proof less maintenance on the
places can be built by just about anyone
they're pretty soundproof and because
you're not taking up any or growing
service you have increased yard space
most aesthetically pleasing because
you're working with nature so well and
the reason people haven't gone
underground because they haven't figured
out yet how to get windows in the place
and that's what we've done here in Idaho
we figured that out for them
you